 
 
 
 
 
Paper Reference(s) 
6677 
Edexcel GCE 
Mechanics M1 
(New Syllabus) 
Advanced/Advanced Subsidiary 
Thursday 23 May 2002 −  Afternoon 
Time:  1 hour 30 minutes 
 
 
Materials required for examination                       Items included with question papers 
Answer Book (AB16)                                                Nil 
Mathematical Formulae (Lilac) 
Graph Paper (ASG2) 
 
 
 
Candidates may use any calculator EXCEPT those with the facility for symbolic 
algebra, differentiation and/or integration. Thus candidates may NOT use calculators 
such as the Texas Instruments TI 89, TI 92, Casio CFX 9970G, Hewlett Packard HP 
48G 
 
 
 
 
Instructions to Candidates 
In the boxes on the answer book, write the name of the examining body (Edexcel), your 
centre number, candidate number, the unit title (Mechanics M1), the paper reference (6677), 
your surname, other name and signature. 
Whenever a numerical value of g is required, take g = 9.8 m s−2. 
When a calculator is used, the answer should be given to an appropriate degree of accuracy. 
 
Information for Candidates 
A booklet ‘Mathematical Formulae and Statistical Tables’ is provided. 
Full marks may be obtained for answers to ALL questions. 
This paper has seven questions. Pages 7 and 8 are blank. 
 
Advice to Candidates 
You must ensure that your answers to parts of questions are clearly labelled. 
You must show sufficient working to make your methods clear to the Examiner. Answers 
without working may gain no credit. 
 
PMT
PMT


--- Page Break ---

 
2 
1. 
A car moves with constant acceleration along a straight horizontal road. The car 
passes the point A with speed 5 m s−1 and 4 s later it passes the point B, where 
AB = 50m. 
 
(a) Find the acceleration of the car. 
(3) 
When the car passes the point C, it has speed 30 m s−1. 
 
(b) Find the distance AC. 
(3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
2. 
The masses of two particles A and B are 0.5 kg and m kg respectively. The particles 
are moving on a smooth horizontal table in opposite directions and collide directly. 
Immediately before the collision the speed of A is 5 m s−1 and the speed of B is 
3 m s−1.  In the collision, the magnitude of the impulse exerted by B on A is 3.6 Ns. 
As a result of the collision the direction of motion of A is reversed. 
 
(a) Find the speed of A immediately after the collision. 
(3) 
The speed of B immediately after the collision is 1 m s−1. 
 
(b) Find the two possible values of m. 
(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMT
PMT


--- Page Break ---

 
 
3 
 
3.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A uniform rod AB has length 100 cm. Two light pans are suspended, one from each 
end of the rod, by two strings which are assumed to be light and inextensible. The 
system forms a balance with the rod resting horizontally on a smooth pivot, as shown 
in Fig. 1. 
 
A particle of weight 16 N is placed in the pan at A and a particle of weight 5 N is 
placed in the pan at B. The rod rests horizontally in equilibrium when the pivot is at 
the point C on the rod, where AC = 30 cm. 
 
(a) Find the weight of the rod. 
(3) 
The particle in the pan at A is replaced by a particle of weight 3.5 N. The particle of 
weight 5 N remains in the pan at B. The rod now rests horizontally in equilibrium 
when the pivot is moved to the point D. 
 
(b) Find the distance AD. 
 
(4) 
(c) Explain briefly where the assumption that the strings are light has been used in 
your answer to part (a). 
 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over 
PMT
PMT


--- Page Break ---

 
4 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
P N 
 
 
 
 
                   30° 
 
 
A box of mass 6 kg lies on a rough plane inclined at an angle of 30° to the horizontal. 
The box is held in equilibrium by means of a horizontal force of magnitude 
P newtons, as shown in Fig. 2. The line of action of the force is in the same vertical 
plane as a line of greatest slope of the plane. The coefficient of friction between the 
box and the plane is 0.4. The box is modelled as a particle. 
 
Given that the box is in limiting equilibrium and on the point of moving up the plane, 
find, 
 
(a) the normal reaction exerted on the box by the plane, 
(4) 
(b) the value of P. 
(3) 
The horizontal force is removed. 
 
(c) Show that the box will now start to move down the plane. 
(5) 
 
5. 
A particle P of mass 2 kg moves in a plane under the action of a single constant force 
F newtons. At time t seconds, the velocity of P is v m s−1. When t  = 0, v = (−5i + 7j) 
and when t = 3, v = (i − 2j). 
 
(a) Find in degrees the angle between the direction of motion of P when t = 3 and 
the vector j. 
(3) 
(b) Find the acceleration of P. 
(2) 
(c) Find the magnitude of F. 
(3) 
(d) Find in terms of t the velocity of P. 
(2) 
(e) Find the time at which P is moving parallel to the vector i + j. 
(3) 
 
PMT
PMT


--- Page Break ---

 
 
5 
 
6. 
A man travels in a lift to the top of a tall office block. The lift starts from rest on the 
ground floor and moves vertically. It comes to rest again at the top floor, having 
moved a vertical distance of 27 m. The lift initially accelerates with a constant 
acceleration of 2 m s−1 until it reaches a speed of 3 m s−1. It then moves with a 
constant speed of 3 m s−1 for T seconds. Finally it decelerates with a constant 
deceleration for 2.5 s before coming to rest at the top floor. 
 
(a) Sketch a speed-time graph for the motion of the lift. 
(2) 
(b) Hence, or otherwise, find the value of T. 
(3) 
(c) Sketch an acceleration-time graph for the motion of the lift. 
(3) 
The mass of the man is 80 kg and the mass of the lift is 120 kg. The lift is pulled up 
by means of a vertical cable attached to the top of the lift. By modelling the cable as 
light and inextensible, find 
 
(d) the tension in the cable when the lift is accelerating, 
 
(3) 
(e) the magnitude of the force exerted by the lift on the man during the last 2.5 s of 
the motion. 
 
(3) 
 
 
 
TURN OVER FOR QUESTION 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over 
PMT
PMT


--- Page Break ---

 
6 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
                   A (2m) 
 
 
          B (m) 
 
 
30° 
 
 
 
Particles A and B, of mass 2m and m respectively, are attached to the ends of a light 
inextensible string. The string passes over a small smooth pulley fixed at the edge of 
a rough horizontal table. Particle A is held on the table, while B rests on a smooth 
plane inclined at 30° to the horizontal, as shown in Fig. 3. The string is in the same 
vertical plane as a line of greatest slope of the inclined plane. The coefficient of 
friction between A and the table is µ. The particle A is released from rest and begins 
to move. 
 
By writing down an equation of motion for each particle, 
 
(a) show that, while both particles move with the string taut. Each particle has an 
acceleration of magnitude 6
1 (1 − 4µ)g. 
(7) 
When each particle has moved a distance h, the string breaks. The particle A comes to 
rest before reaching the pulley. Given that µ = 0.2, 
 
(b) find, in terms of h, the total distance moved by A. 
(6) 
For the model described above, 
 
(c) state two physical factors, apart from air resistance, which could be taken into 
account to make the model more realistic. 
(2) 
 
END 
 
 
 
 
PMT
PMT
